My current work is on a number of areas in geophysical fluid dynamics. My dissertation is based on assessing the impact of geostrophically balanced potential vorticity (PV) flows upon a propagating internal gravity wavefield. One interpretation of the quasigeostrophic equation is that it is based on a multiple scale analysis of a complete wavefield that includes both stationary PV modes and propagating internal waves. The physical basis for this result is that the effects of the waves can be proven to average out over time, with the exception of select resonant triads. In the case of PV evolution, it can be shown that no such triads exist, and that the PV evolves independently of the gravity waves. The converse statement is not true, however: the PV modes can influence the gravity wavefield. I have derived a linear evolution equation describing this influence, and am currently developing a simple pseudospectral model to verify that this interaction exists and that the derived equation is valid. I expect that this result will help to quantify the behavior of long tidally generated gravity waves in a region of high PV activity such as an eddy-containing field.

I have also developed an equation for the wake angle of a flow past an obstacle in a rotating shallow water fluid, analogous to the Kelvin wake angle for a boat in deep water. I have extended this derivation to construct the wake angle in any generic wavefield. I am attemping to find an application for this result in the tidally generated waves near the Hawaiian basin.

I am completing work with George Veronis that I began at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution on the evolution of a double diffusive gravity current. We have developed a method for measuring the concentrations of both diffusive agents in the fluid (salt and sugar) as functions of time in a nonrotating system. We also provide detailed descriptions of the frontal propagation rates for both nonrotating and rotating currents, and visualization of the dynamical features that emerge. The manuscript for this work is nearing completion.

The intended future direction for my research is on the question of optimal modeling of unresolved dynamics. If one considers an oceanic flow in a bounded basin that obeys, for example, shallow water dynamics, then the system can be fully described by a countably infinite number of discrete modes (barring shock-like discontinuities). A numerical model can at best only model a finite subset of these modes. Rather than simply assume that the effect of the small scale are dissipative, I am hoping to take an information theoretic approach to the unresolved modes. Prior work has approached the system as a whole, attempting to construct equilibrium solutions that depend on globally conserved quantities such as energy and potential vorticity and maximum entropy. I believe that a more sophisticated approach may be possible, so that the complete dynamical information of the resolved large-scale modes can be used with entropy maximization to provide a refined description of the best estimate for the unresolved modes at each timestep of a numerical iteration scheme. In this way, an optimal model for the system with removed information can be constructed. I believe that this is a far-reaching problem and that work in this direction could have a strong impact on a large number of disciplines.

Outside of oceanography, I am attemping to develop a model to describe the equilibrium size of a cell in a constant fluid flow. It is primarily based on developing meaningful boundary conditions for the cell membrane under an assumption of Stokes flow.
